JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first,
we turn to Bangladesh and
the plight of the Rohingya.
They are an ethnic minority
group seeking refuge there,
many having been forced from
their homes in
neighboring Myanmar.
But as special correspondent
Tania Rashid found,
they are hardly more
welcome in Bangladesh.
By the tens of thousands, they
are stuck in a deadly limbo.
And a warning: Parts of this
story may disturb some viewers.
TANIA RASHID: The island is
isolated, covered in bushes,
and underwater half of the year.
It's called Thenga Chor, and it
lies on the coast of Bangladesh.
It's a hard and long day's boat
ride from the nearest port.
This rough spot might be the
new home for the Rohingya,
a group of more than 300,000
people the U.N. calls
the most persecuted
minority in the world.
But on a camp on the mainland,
Hafez, a Rohingya activist,
says that is no place they want
to go.
HAFEZ, Activist (through
translator): If we go to
Thenga Chor, we will get sick.
We can die.
We are used to being here,
and we feel safe here.
TANIA RASHID: It's
only a relative safety.
Close to half-a-million have
fled murder and persecution
by the army of Myanmar to seek
refuge in camps in
Southern Bangladesh.
The Muslim Rohingya have
lived in mainly Buddhist
Myanmar for centuries,
but are viewed as illegal
ethnic Bangladeshis by
the Myanmar government.
The de facto leader of Myanmar,
Nobel peace laureate Aung San
Suu Kyi, has denied a U.N.
charge of ethnic cleansing
of the Rohingya'.
But in the last eight months,
the numbers of Rohingya fleeing
for their lives have surged
to more than 70,000.
But now their lives are more
precarious than ever before.
Monsoon season and a
punishing cyclone damaged
many Rohingya settlements.
So, the Bangladeshi government
plans to resolve the Rohingya's
continued displacement by moving
60,000 of the refugees
to this remote island.
Aid agencies like the UNHCR
and Human Rights Watch have
expressed alarm over the planned
relocation.
Our journey to the
island was difficult.
We began a week
before the cyclone.
We traveled first by ferry,
then by a private boat, where a
local fishermen agreed to take
us to the island.
It was a dangerous journey.
Pirates are known to
control these seas and
take hostages for ransom.
But the island is
not easy to access.
The tides are too high on
the bigger ship, so we had to
get a smaller boat to take us
to the island.
We just made it on the island.
We managed to find a muddy
bog to land near, and get
us across to the island.
The government has already
moved forward with the plan of
making the island more habitable
by planting trees.
But this local official
doesn't want the Rohingyas
moving into his district.
He thinks it will create more
problems for his community.
MINAZUR RAHMAN, Local
Official (through
translator): In the past,
the Rohingya were related to
the drug problem.
They are linked to drugs,
linked to smuggling.
Most of the people here, their
main livelihood is fishing.
The bad character and influence
of the Rohingya people will
impact the locals here.
TANIA RASHID: But the
Bangladeshi government
believe the Rohingyas
cross the border at
will, with the help of smugglers
and corrupt border guards.
The government argues the
relocation will guarantee their
isolation from the rest of
the population.
But the island is formed by
river sediment, making it
unstable, and it could be eroded
in five years' time.
Dr. Ainun Nishat is a
leading expert on climate
change in Bangladesh.
DR.
AINUN NISHAT, Climate Change
Expert: The main history of
the coastal belt of Bangladesh
is highly vulnerable to storm
surges and cyclonic weather.
Due to impact of climate change,
we believe that the frequency
of climate change may not
be increasing, but intensity
of the storm surges are
definitely going to increase.
So, they should be accommodated
in good concrete structure,
where at the time of emergency
people should we -- can
be moved to a height
of 20 feet and above.
TANIA RASHID: Today, about
one million Rohingyas
live in apartheid-like
conditions in internment
camps in Rakhine State of
Myanmar, separated from
the Buddhist majority.
They have no citizenship, and
need permission to marry or
to travel outside of their own
villages.
On October 9 of last year,
Rohingya militants killed
nine Myanmar police officers.
The Myanmar military
then led a wide and
brutal counterinsurgency
campaign in retaliation,
where they killed more
than 1,000 Rohingyas,
torched homes and mosques.
The Myanmar government calls
these accusations exaggerations
and denies charges of ethnic
cleansing.
Dil Nawaz is one of
70,000 Rohingya's who
fled to Bangladesh.
She was gang-raped by soldiers,
and witnessed her husband's
murder in front of her eyes.
I'm looking at a photo of
her husband who was hacked to
death about five months ago,
and this is a photograph
she took shortly after
she was murdered.
DIL NAWAZ, Refugee (through
translator): They used a machete
on my husband in front of me
on the road.
I saw it with my own eyes.
They chopped him into pieces
in front of me in a rice field.
Then, the army came and took
all the women out to the rice
fields and took several women.
Five men took turns raping them.
They took people's gold
jewelry, rings and earrings.
They killed some children.
Then they burned all the houses
down, followed by the mosque.
Then the military went
back to a Buddhist area.
This is why we
fled to Bangladesh.
TANIA RASHID: Activist
Hafez says they have
found refuge here.
HAFEZ (through translator):
Bangladesh is small, and
overpopulated, but they gave us
a place to stand.
This is a big thing.
TANIA RASHID: But like many
other Rohingya, he wants
a sense of permanence.
HAFEZ (through translator):
Instead of sending us to Thenga
Chor, if the Myanmar government
could, we request that
they grant us citizenship.
TANIA RASHID: Forty-five-year
old Dilbar hopes for a
last-ditch political solution.
DILBAR, Refugee (through
translator): If the
Bangladesh government and
the Myanmar government
negotiate a deal and send us
back, then we will be happy.
If this doesn't happen,
then please bomb us.
We came here, left
our homes, rice.
We came here to save our lives.
If we have no peace,
then it's better to die.
Our children died there.
We sacrificed everything
and came here for peace.
If you take us to the
island, it will be like
killing us, slaughtering us.
We are like Anthony Scaramucci.
We are nothing.
It won't take much to kill us.
Just bomb us.
Nobody will make a case
against you, because we have
no ground under our feet.
TANIA RASHID: Their hope, to
find that safe ground one day.
But, for now, they remain
in limbo, not of this land
and not pushed from it.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Tania Rashid on Thenga
Chor Island, Bangladesh.